\input texinfo 
@c -*-texinfo-*-

@code{makeinfo}
@code{texinfo-format-buffer}

@c
@c Design notes and documentation about GNU Modula-2
@c
@c
@c part 1 header
@c

@setfilename gm2.info
@settitle The GNU Modula-2 front end to GCC

@c
@c Part 2: Summary Description and Copyright
@c

@ifinfo
This is a short example of a complete Texinfo file.

Copyright @copyright{} 2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@end ifinfo

@c Part 3: Titlepage and Copyright
@c The titlepage segment does not appear in the Info file. 
@titlepage
@sp 10
@comment The title is printed in a large font.
@center @titlefont{The GNU Modula-2 front end to GCC}

@c The following two commands start the copyright page.
@page
@setchapternewpage odd
@sp 2
@center Gaius Mulley
@sp 3
@center Last updated 30 October 2000
@sp 1
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@end titlepage

@c Part 4: `Top' Node and Master Menu

@ifinfo
@node Top, Using, (dir), (dir)
@top Introduction
@end ifinfo

@menu
* Using::            Using GNU Modula-2
* Internals::        GNU Modula-2 internals
@end menu

@node Using, Internals, Top, Top
@chapter Using GNU Modula-2

@menu
* About::             What this document explains.
* History::           How GNU Modula-2 came about.
* Compiler options::  GNU Modula-2 compiler options.
* Example usage::     Example compile and link.
* Extensions::        GNU Modula-2 language extensions.
* Interface to C::    Interfacing GNU Modula-2 to C
* Assembly language:: Interface to assembly language.
@end menu

@node About, History, , Using
@section About

This file contains design notes accompanying the Modula-2
front end to gcc. The GNU Modula-2 compiler is based on
the language as defined in 'Programming in Modula-2'
2nd Edition, Springer Verlag, 1982, 1983 by Niklaus Wirth.
(PIM2).
Although it does include minor extensions.

The libraries are currently a mixture of ISO Modula-2 and
'Programming in Modula-2'. It is our aim to extend the
GNU Modula-2 to include PIM3 and PIM4 command line switches
to include later language alterations.

@node History, Compiler options, About, Using
@section History

The Modula-2 compiler sources have come from the m2f compiler which
runs under GNU/Linux. The original m2f compiler was written in Modula-2
and was bootstrapped via a "hacked" version of p2c 1.20. The m2f
compiler was a recursive descent which generated quadruples as
intermediate code. It also used C style calling convention wherever
possible and utilized a C structure for dynamic arrays.

@node Compiler options, Example usage, History, Using
@section Compiler options

This section describe the compiler options specific to GNU Modula-2 for
generic flags details see
@xref{Invoking GCC, , ,gcc}.

@table @code

@item -Wbounds
generate code to check the bounds of subranges and array indexes.

@item -Wreturn
generate code to check that functions always exit with a @samp{RETURN} and do not
fall out at the end.

@item -verbose
if an error occurs the erroneous text is displayed with an arrow indicating
the approximate character in error.
The line number and file is always displayed, but sometimes the compiler
attributes the error to the following line.
The @samp{-verbose} option is more accurate and more verbose!

@item -Wstatistics
generates quadruple information: number of quadruples generated,
number of quadruples remaining after optimization.

@item -Wstudents
checks for novice peculiarities. Note that these warnings are not
the same as error messages. Hardened users of Modula-2 may wish to ignore this
option as it checks to see whether a user has declared a variable name
twice which looks the same and whether a variable looks similar to a keyword.
(Case difference etc). This is of course quite legal Modula-2 but
some first year students might find this option useful.

@item -Wpedantic
forces the compiler to reject nested @samp{WITH}
statements referencing the same record type.
Does not allow multiple imports of the same item from a module.
It also checks that: procedure variables are written to before being read;
variables are not only written to but read from; variables are declared and used.
If the compiler encounters a variable being read before written it will terminate
with a message.
It will check that @samp{FOR} loop indices are not used outside the end of this loop
without being reset.

@item -Wmakelist
this option is only applicable when linking a program module.
The compiler will generate a @file{modulename.lst} file which contains
a list indicating the initialization order of all modules which are to be
linked. The actual link does not occur.
The gm2 linker scans all @code{IMPORT}s, generates a list of dependancies
and produces an ordered list for initialization. It will probably get the
order wrong if your project has cyclic dependancies, but
the @file{.lst} file is plain text and can be modified if required.
Once the @file{.lst} file is created it can be used by the compiler
to link your project via the @samp{-Wuselist} option.
It has no effect if the @samp{-c} option is present.

@item -Wuselist
providing @samp{gm2} has been told to link the program module this
option uses the file @file{modulename.lst} for the initialization
order of modules.

@end table

@node Example usage, Extensions, Compiler options, Using
@section Example compile and link

This section describes how to compiler and link a simple hello world program.
It provides a few examples of using the different options mentioned in
@xref{Compiler options, , ,gm2}.
Assuming that you have a file called @file{hello.mod} in your current directory
which contains:

@example
MODULE hello ;

FROM StrIO IMPORT WriteString, WriteLn ;

BEGIN
   WriteString('hello world') ; WriteLn
END hello.
@end example

You should be able to compile it by:
@samp{gm2 -c -g hello.mod}
and link via:
@samp{gm2 -g hello.mod}.
The result should be an @samp{a.out} file created in your directory.
Hint, the
@samp{-v} displays the subprocesses initiated by
@samp{gm2}.
This can be useful when trouble shooting.

@node Extensions, Interface to C, Example usage, Using
@section GNU Modula-2 language extensions

This section introduces the GNU Modula-2 language extensions.
The GNU Modula-2 compiler allows abstract data types to be
@code{any} type, not just restricted to a pointer type.

It also allows declarations in any order. Type, constant, procedure and
variable declarations can be in any order. Nested modules may also declare
types in any order, consider:

@example
MODULE colour ;

   PROCEDURE make (VAR c: colours) ;
   BEGIN
      c := yellow
   END make ;

   MODULE inner ;
   EXPORT colours ;

   TYPE
      colours = (red, blue, yellow, white) ;
   END inner ;

VAR
   g: colours
BEGIN
   make(g)
END colour.
@end example

@node Interface to C, Assembly language, Extensions, Using
@section Interfacing GNU Modula-2 to C

The GNU Modula-2 compiler tries to use the C calling convention wherever
possible however some parameters have no C equivalent and
thus a language specific method is used. For example unbounded
arrays are passed as a @code{struct void *address, unsigned int high }
and the contents of these arrays are copied by callee functions
when they are declared as non @code{VAR} parameters.
The @code{VAR} equivalent unbounded array parameters need no copy,
but still use the @code{struct} representation.

The recommended method of interfacing GNU Modula-2 to C is by using
a dummy definition module and writing a C wrapper implementation module.
For example suppose we wish to utilize the
@code{read} function within libc. In this case we might write a
definition module as shown below:

@example
DEFINITION MODULE libc ;

FROM SYSTEM IMPORT ADDRESS ;
EXPORT QUALIFIED read ;

PROCEDURE read (d: INTEGER; buf: ADDRESS; nbytes: INTEGER) : INTEGER ;

END libc.
@end example

The C implementation module might look similar to this:

@example
int libc_read(int d, void *buf, int nbytes)
@{
  return( read(d, buf, nbytes) );
@}

void _M2_libc_init (void)
@{
@}
@end example

Notice the last function is currently required as all modules have
an initialization section. In the C wrapper implemenation we provide
this function to satisfy the linking mechanism.

The mechanism of using a C implementation wrapper does add a slight overhead
but reduces name clashes within a module importing from this module and
solves the initialization function issue.

--fixme-- this next method breaks the linker (use method above).

The alternative method is to use the @code{UNQUALIFIED} keyword
in the definition module which tells GNU Modula-2 not to prefix the module name
to identifiers when emiting the assembly language. So if we were linking to
libc again we would write our definition module as:

@example
DEFINITION MODULE libc ;

FROM SYSTEM IMPORT ADDRESS ;
EXPORT UNQUALIFIED read ;

PROCEDURE read (d: INTEGER; buf: ADDRESS; nbytes: INTEGER) : INTEGER ;

END libc.
@end example

and require no C wrapper implementation.

@node Assembly language, , Interface to C, Using
@section Interface to assembly language

The interface for GNU Modula-2 to assembly language is almost identical to GNU C.
The only alterations are that the keywords asm and volatile are in capitals,
following the Modula-2 convention.

A simple, but highly non optimal, example is given below. Here we want to add the
two @code{CARDINAL}s @code{foo} and @code{bar} together and return the result.

@example
PROCEDURE Example (foo, bar: CARDINAL) : CARDINAL ;
VAR
   myout: CARDINAL ;
BEGIN
   ASM VOLATILE ("movl %1,%%eax; addl %2,%%eax; movl %%eax,%0"
      : "=g" (myout)           (* outputs *)
      : "g" (foo), "g" (bar)   (* inputs  *)
      : "eax") ;               (* we trash *)
   RETURN( myout )
END Example ;
@end example

For a full description of this interface we refer the reader to the GNU C manual.

@xref{Extended Asm, ,Extensions to the C Language Family,gcc}.

@node Internals, , Using, Top
@chapter GNU Modula-2 Internals

This document is a small step in the long journey of documenting the GNU
Modula-2 compiler and how it integrates with GCC.
The document is still in it's infancy.

@menu
* Integrating::       How the front end integrates with gcc.
* Practicalities::    Overview of how m2f is built.
* Future::            A future wish list.
* Done list::         Progression of the GNU Modula-2 project.
* To do list::        Outstanding issues.
@end menu

@node Integrating, Practicalities, ,Internals
@section How the front end integrates with gcc

This section needs rewriting and is currently out of date
(--fixme-- 20/9/2000).
We need to convert the quadruples into tree structure and also
declare variables, functions, modules, types seemingly at the
same time. The m2f native code generators all took the quadruples
and sequentially generated code. The GCC integration needs more
thought as it must only declare items who have had their children
already written out by GCC. The approach taken is as follows:

@itemize @bullet
@item
follow the M2GDB dependancy code to ensure that all TYPEs
are declared and written to the assembly fule *without*
need for forward references.

@item
At this point all of the types *seen* will be declared and
written out in '.stabs'

@item
then we can trawl though the quadruple list happily declaring
functions and generating code in the knowledge that all types
global variables have already been declared.
Lists of quadruples are turned into trees and passed onto GCC.
@end itemize

@node Practicalities, Future, Integrating, Internals
@section Practicalities

(Also out of date --fixme--).
For the moment the directory gm2/m2 will contain the Modula-2
source code for front end m2f. The m2f compiler will be built
during stage1, stage2, stage3 in line with gcc. We introduce
a stage0 which will build the "hacked" p2c-1.20 which translates
the Modula-2 code into C during stage1. At a later stage we
can dispense with the "hacked" p2c-1.20 and ship C/M2 source
code maybe? Anyhow, currently that is a long way off and since
major development will take place the p2c-1.20 will remain.

In essence m2f will be given a new code generator namely "gcc".
This new code generator performs the quadruples to tree conversion
and symbol table to gcc symbol table conversion. This code will
be a mixture of Modula-2 and C.
The original M2ALU module containing simple arithmetic operators (used for
constant folding) will be replaced by a skeleton M2ALU which utilizes
the GCC tree constant folding functions. The M2Base and M2System
modules containing base types and system types respectively are also
rewritten to utilize the GCC backend data types.

@node Future, Done list, Practicalities, Internals
@section A future wish list

In the future it might be sensible to rewrite M2Quads.mod to
directly call gcc routines, rather than generate quadruples.
However this is a large alteration and I'd firstly like to
see gm2 working with the method outlined above, which is
conceptually easier.

@node Done list, To do list, Future, Internals
@section Done list

What has been done:

@itemize @bullet
@item
the sources to m2f and gcc compile and link to produce cc1gm2.
Compiler will bootstrap itself and three generations of the
compiler all produce the same code.

@item
the back end will generate code and assembly declarations for
modules containing global variables of all types. Procedure
prologue/epilogue is created.

@item
all loop constructs, if then else, case statements and expressions.

@item
nested module initialization.

@item
pointers, arrays, procedure calls, nested procedures.

@item
front end @samp{gm2} can now compile and link modules.

@item
the ability to insert gnu asm statements within GNU Modula-2.

@item
inbuilt functions, SIZE, ADR, TSIZE, HIGH etc

@item
block becomes and complex procedure parameters (unbounded arrays, strings).

@item
the front end now utilizes GCC tree constants and types and is no
longer tied to a 32 bit architecture, but reflects the 'configure'
target machine description.

@item
fixed all C compiler warnings when gcc compiles the p2c generated C
with -Wall.

@item
built a new parser which implements error recovery.

@end itemize

Nearly all the to do work is concerned with interfacing m2f with
gcc and most of this work is localized in the following files:

@file{gm2/gm2.c}
@file{gm2/gccgm2.def}
@file{gm2/m2/comp/gm2s/gcc/M2GenGCC.mod}
@file{gm2/m2/comp/gm2s/gcc/M2GCCDeclare.mod}

@node To do list, , Done list, Internals
@section To do list

What needs to be done:

@itemize @bullet

@item
fix the implications of UNQUALIFIED within the linking mechanism

@item
modify all makefiles to make them comply with GNU standards.

@item
rewrite documentation.

@item
profile compiler and improve compilation speed.
Compiling @file{P1SyntaxCheck.mod} takes far too long.

@item
the modula-2 front end needs to convert the quadruples into
trees and the convert these trees into gcc trees, rather than
simply translating each quadruple into a separate gcc tree.
The later works but better code could be generated by
building a large tree and passing this tree to gcc.
One way to implement this is by taking a copy of M2SubExp.mod and
basing the gcc calls on the tree structure that M2SubExp.mod builds.
My belief is that this should not take much time to complete and
should produce better code.

@item
utilize GNU autoconf rather than the makeconfigure script.

@item
integrate the small testsuite (gm2/m2/comp/autotest)
into dejagnu ?? and improve

@item
Coroutines - as mentioned by readers of comp.lang.modula2.

@item
improve documentation, specifically this document which should
also include a synopsis of 2nd Edition Modula-2.

@item
testing and fixing bugs

@item
provide a mechanism for conditional compilation.

@end itemize

@c @printindex cp

@summarycontents
@contents
@bye
