@c Copyright (C) 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
@c under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
@c any later version published by the Free Software Foundation.

These modules are provided to enable legacy Modula-2 applications to
build with GNU Modula-2. It is advised that these module should not
be used for new projects, maybe the ISO libraries or the native
compiler PIM libraries (FIO) should be used instead.

Here is an outline of the module layering:

@example

InOut  RealInOut  LongIO CardinalIO
    \     |       |      /
           Terminal
-----------------------------------
              |
           Termbase
           /      \
    Keyboard      Display

@end example

Above the line are user level PIM [234] and Logitech 3.0 compatible
modules.  Below the line Logitech 3.0 advised that these modules
should be considered part of the runtime system. The libraries do
not provide all the features found in the Logitech libraries as
a number of these features were MS-DOS related. Essentially the
basic input/output, file system, string manipulation and conversion
routines are provided. Access to DOSCALL, graphics, time and date
are not as these were constrained by the limitations of MS-DOS.

The following libraries are contained within the base GNU Modula-2
libraries but are also Logitech-3.0 compatible: ASCII, Storage
and MathLib0.

@menu
* gm2-libs/ASCII::ASCII.def
* gm2-libs/Storage::Storage.def
* gm2-libs/MathLib0::MathLib0.def
@end menu

